kelly talk to you a little bit about the
game super hyper cube which was made by
my collective that i'm a member of
kokoro me and those are some ways you
can get in touch if you want to talk so
in my day job because you could say I'm
a system professor at Carnegie Mellon
University and their entertainment
Technology Center and my background how
I got to do that is that I'm a video
game designer I've been working in the
what you would call triple-a industry
sort of big-budget games for about 19
years and just by way of example this is
one called a splinter cell it's a Tom
Clancy sort of spy game and I worked on
that in two thousand and what five and
but on the sort of side track I've also
a curator of games and game like
experiences and making more experimental
types of games and as a researcher and
this piece here is at an exhibition in
paris in 2012 called jeweler zoo which
means kind of play along with me and
it's a piece by hide and seek sadly now
defunct london-based game operation it's
called the building is and it was a
piece that infused the entire building
in downtown Paris with this game where
you interacted with the different senses
of the building and then it would
express how it reacted to you through
its emotions and what you see here when
you entered the building was a display
of what its current emotional state was
and it's looking a little turbulent
there um and some work personal work of
mine this is a hopscotch it kind of POD
to do a hopscotch for two called tanta
untucked air outlet facl
and it's a meant to be played by
multiple pairs of people going along one
after the other so we could have
multiple teams playing on it at the same
time it's like 19 metres long and you'd
have to do things like hold hands with
the other player or give encouragement
to other people that were on the
hopscotch or race against each other or
cross paths without touching and that
was entirely conveyed through the
symbols of the hopscotch itself so a
completely non digital peace except that
it was made and of course on a computer
and but what I want to talk to you about
today is the the piece you can see right
now out in the exhibition which was made
by my collective kokoro me as I had
mentioned we are we've been around now
for 10 years it's kind of amazing we
started in 2006 we met in Montreal and
there's four of us Damian Cindy me and
Phil and just by way of example of the
kind of things we were doing when we
first got started these are some images
from one of our events that called gamma
and this one in particular was gamma 256
this was in 2007 and what we did was we
were interested in sort of getting
experimental games made and then
bringing those to a public so we invited
people game creators to make a game that
would fit into a small aspect ratio it
had to be less than 256 pixels in any
direction but we curated for the ones
that were even more extreme so the
smallest one in the exhibit was 8 by 8
pixels so on the display they were all
in projection and like every pixel is
about this big and it was totally
playable it was amazing and that event
was actually known somewhat well for
being the debut of Jason roars passage
which if you know is a kind of memento
mori game that occurs in a kind of strip
format across the screen and is now in
the collection of the MoMA and
other places but after this particular
event to the gamma 256 we were thinking
about what we might want to do next and
we don't have a set format of like
yearly events or anything like that but
when something inspires us we kind of
want to grab onto it and see what we can
do with it and and if you'll remember
the year right after that was the year
of the 3d television does anybody
remember these things completely
ridiculous um so yeah they're they're of
course all the hype because they we were
supposed to go out and buy new TVs and
and the the glasses that would go with
them that would let you see this so that
like the the monster or a spider-man
would jump off the screen and into your
living room and so you had to go get
these and we were understandably quite
skeptical of this but wanted to and they
were also being pitched a lot to game
developers is something that Oh start
making games for this this new format
these 3d TVs and I guess it should be
emphasized that it's talking about
stereoscopic so there's a lot of games
that are made with three-dimensional
graphics but these are talking about
ones where you actually see two images
of your two eyes so we weren't buying it
but we were actually kind of curious
doesn't matter at all is there something
you can do with stereo stereoscopic
vision that would mean something in the
game so we decided to make an event
about that and called it gamma 3d and so
in 2008 we proposed that people
contribute some kind of game that would
use stereoscopic vision but we decided
to go very low Phi and went with
anaglyphic stereoscopy which is the red
scion the type that you have when you're
in a movie theater in the 50s so you see
us all wearing those glasses here that's
one I read when I Scion and we wanted to
find out if it could be more than just
eye candy to have this stereoscopic site
and we also started working on our own
game for that and this is the very kind
of seed crux of super hyper cube it was
base
on that game you might see a TV game
show called hole in the wall or it's
sometimes called human Tetris depending
on which country it's being shown in and
the idea is that there is a shape in the
foreground usually in the TV game show
it's yourself and you're making like a
shape and there's a wall coming towards
you and you have to move in the right
position so that you don't get knocked
over by the wall and fall into the water
but in our case it was a bunch of cubes
and that the cube cluster was going to
be growing as you went along so but what
we did to actually in our in our
estimation that wasn't actually going to
work very well if you only have the
stereoscopic vision what else would need
it would actually need to have head
tracking so while we were developing the
game itself we were also playing around
with this DIY head tracking solution
that had come out on YouTube that year
from a researcher named Johnny Lee who
is was at the time at the Carnegie
Mellon's human-computer interaction
Institute and he was just making things
with readily available hardware
technologies that you could get like
consumer stuff and putting it together
to make things possible that really
hadn't been very accessible before and
so you see here these in these stills
from his video he's he's putting on the
glasses and the glasses actually have
the infrared lights on the side and then
the the Nintendo Wii mote is pointing at
from the TV at you and so you can use
that to kind of get this head tracking
effect so we decided to put those two
things together the head tracking and
the stereoscope stereoscopic vision and
that's what you have here it's a pair of
3d glasses with the infrared tracking
them soldered and hot glued on to the
the sides of it it was you know very
fragile system sometimes had to be
reconstituted every time we were doing
another showing of it but it worked
great it gives you a real kind of magic
window effect on to the game world which
at this point was still on some
kind of screen or in a projection but
you really felt like you where you were
where your head was and what was in
front of you mattered so you'd have to
I'm going to go away from the microphone
here but you had to lean like this or
like that to actually be able to see
what was going on in the game world so
we felt that with the addition of this
head tracking we were able to kind of
solve that particular question so the
real answer is the stereoscopic vision
doesn't do too much on its own but when
you add that element of where is your
head located in space surprisingly it
starts to to mean something so so yeah
we showed the surrounded a number of
different festivals at the time and it
might have just sort of gone to rest
there but a few years later you may
recall this happening the Kickstarter
for the oculus rift came along and
everybody was starting to them think
about Wow actually we have all the parts
in place to be able to make something
that people could actually have in their
homes and use and that also started us
thinking because we really like the game
and a lot of people had wondered how
they would ever get to play it and it
occurred to us that well we should we
should go for it because essentially
it's using exactly the same controls
that that we've used all along we
designed it specifically for this system
for this stereoscopic vision for the
head tracking and for a handheld
controller so why not let's just go for
it but we had to kind of rethink a lot
of the not the design of the game per se
but a lot of the visuals because with
the anaglyphic stereoscopy you have the
you have a color palette limitation
since you're relying on color to
separate those channels and now we could
go full color so of course this is where
we went naturally so we are of course
incredibly inspired by a lot of the the
visions the science fiction the science
fantasy of things like 2001 or the
targeting computer in Star Wars the the
vector graphics style
and sort of also the kind of analog
graphics styles of those and we also
have some inspiration from the kind of
dream of computers and what they're
going to bring us the not just the way
that things look but the evocation of
this sense of wonder and of hope but at
the same time we have a lot of neon in
our game and it's kind of a cyberpunk
commentary I guess or reference because
there's that whole strand of science
fiction that's more dystopian but also
looking at like what does it mean to be
human and these these kind of analog
elements really kind of recall that for
us and there's we're supposed to like
leave behind the physical world and
we're merging with our machines and you
see that in things like Tron and of
course the other aspect of this is that
it's really nostalgic for us we have a
lot of childhood associations with this
and a friend who I think is in the
audience recently told me that that when
he played a VR game for the first time
he got this sense of sort of like what
it was like when he played like maybe
NES or one of those console games for
the first time and it's like world
opened up to him and the the the VR is
sort of trying to do the same thing now
one reference that I can never resist
bringing but that is rather unusual for
people if if they didn't grow up at
teenage girl in the 70s or something is
this is some screens from Xanadu the
musical with elektra electric light
orchestra and Olivia newton-john and to
me the the neon also recalls this it's
more of a magical feminine and the
actually the scene here on the bottom is
like the scene of heaven where the gods
live and I really think it's important
to kind of also reintegrate this aspect
of the technology imaginary not just the
the tron but also the Xanadu so that's
sort of like all from around the 80s era
of this
fascination with an imagination of what
what these virtual worlds might be like
and then we jump ahead another 10 years
and we get to references that are
actually the first I guess would be
close to the first wave of virtual
reality that was being made and explored
you might recognize jaron lanier 'he's
set the what's called the virtual
interface environment workstation there
on the left i think it's actually
interesting the comparison with these
two images the real and the virtual
because the way that the woman is
positioned it makes you think perhaps
she's actually in the she is the with
the lawnmower man and the sim maybe
that's what she's experiencing there
NASA brought that to her um so but that
you know that was more as we got toward
the the 90s and it became more real it
also became a bit more we started to see
the pessimistic view of what the virtual
reality what virtual reality might be
where it overtakes us and and we go
crazy and we can't resist it so the the
tension there is is really quite
interesting and fruitful for for us I
think that the other thing I would
really love to remember from the 90s if
there's anything I want to emulate and
from the 90s it's the work of char
Davies I don't know if any of you all
know her please tell her what we miss
her and this piece the osmos which uses
an actual kind of lung it uses a sort of
vest and so when you breathe in you rise
up and when you breathe out you you
descend in the world and it's quite
beautiful and ethereal and it actually
in its virtual reality but in a way it
puts you more in touch with your
physical body and not doesn't take you
away from it it puts you into it our
other influences are actually more
outside of the world of virtuality and
more in the world of art
were very influenced by light and space
artists artists that are working with a
perceptual phenomena and neon light
things like Dan Flavin oleifera liason
and we are bringing those influences
directly into the the work itself here's
some early concept drawings of our
concept illustrations of super hyper
cube where you can see it's essentially
very minimalist puzzle game but in these
very enveloping worlds and this one I
think might actually literally be a
gamester el peace with that we used as a
kind of concept for our own idea of what
we would like the game to feel like so
we started from there and then went to
developing it for the the virtual
reality system and so you see here are
just a few of the early prototypes from
from our development process which we've
been at about a year and a half now
maybe almost two years and then the the
version that you have out there oh it's
flashing hope it's okay for everybody
but the the version that we have out in
the lobby right now is the one that's
going to be released first it's for the
PlayStation virtual reality system that
comes out in October so you will be able
to see some of these influences that
I've mentioned here and we don't really
know which of these VR futures that
we're heading towards as a culture it's
probably all of them but in as much as
Co crummy have any say in the matter we
know which of these versions we want to
be facing toward and we hope you'll come
along with us thanks